Department: Will be determined upon hire Position Title: Instructor(s) Previous Incumbent or New Position:  New Position Description: The candidate(s), in partnership with the MPH Program leadership, will have responsibility for teaching and mentoring a cohort of MPH students in formal classroom settings, via lectures and case-based learning, and field-based integrated learning. Some effort will be allocated for extramural public health service and engagement (allowing the candidates to be involved in public health practice work), and some effort may be allocated for scholarly activities, including primary or collaborative public health research, publication of case series or case reports and book chapters, as well as service to the college and professional associations. The Instructor(s) will work with students in one of two of the concertation areas to help ensure student learning and application of knowledge and skills in case-based scenarios and real-world experiences. This will include teaching parts of the suite of already existing applied public health courses, and mentoring students in their multi-semester applied and community-engaged project work centered on the core functions of public health: Assessment, Program/Policy Planning, Program Monitoring/Evaluation/Performance Improvement. The Instructor(s) will also mentor students through their Capstone Project. Advertisement: Public Health Instructor (part- or full-time) Cornell University is looking for one-to-two Instructor(s) (part-time or full time) for the Master in Public Health (MPH) program.  MPH program details are listed here: www.publichealth.cornell.edu. The instructor(s) will work with students in one of two of the concertation areas to help ensure student learning and application of knowledge and skills in case-based scenarios and real-world experiences. This will include teaching parts of the suite of already existing applied public health courses, and mentoring students in their multi-semester applied and community-engaged project work centered on the core functions of public health: Assessment, Program/Policy Planning, Program Monitoring/Evaluation/Performance Improvement. The instructor(s) will also mentor students through their Capstone Project. The ideal candidate(s) will have: The candidate(s), in partnership with the MPH Program leadership, will have responsibility for teaching and mentoring a cohort of MPH students in formal classroom settings, via case-based learning, and field-based integrated learning. Some effort will be allocated for extramural public health service and engagement (allowing the candidates to be involved in public health practice work), and some effort may be allocated for scholarly activities, including primary or collaborative public health research, publication of case series or case reports and book chapters, as well as service to the college and professional associations. These are non-tenure track faculty appointments, and may be offered at full time, or part-time with the possibility of growth. Joint appointments will be considered. Salary and title will be commensurate with credentials and experience. For more information about this position or the search, contact Gen Meredith, Search Committee Chair, gmeredith@cornell.edu.  Prospective candidates should upload their application materials (a one-to-two-page personal statement summarizing their experience, concentration area of interest, and potential contribution to the MPH program; contributions to inclusion and diversity; curriculum vitae; and contact information for three professional references) to Academic Jobs Online (AJO) job number [#12770]. What is a Statement of Contribution to Diversity? A statement invites applicants to describe their past, present, and/or future aspirations to promoting equity, inclusion, and diversity in their careers as researchers and educators, and/or to convey how they see these commitments continuing at Cornell.   Such articulation can focus on teaching, research, or service, or all of three factors. Diversity and Inclusion are a part of Cornell University’s heritage. We are a recognized employer and educator valuing AA/EEO, Protected Veterans and Individuals with Disabilities. The University seeks to meet the needs of dual career couples and has a Dual Career program to assist with dual career searches. The Cornell University College of Veterinary Medicine is recognized internationally as a leader in public health, biomedical research, animal medicine, and veterinary medical education. It has been consistently ranked as a top veterinary college in the nation by US News & World Report since 2000. Cornell University is an innovative Ivy League university and an exceptional place to work. Our inclusive community of scholars, students and staff impart an uncommon sense of larger purpose and contribute creative ideas to further the university's mission of teaching, discovery and engagement. Located in Ithaca, NY, Cornell's far-flung global presence includes the medical college's campuses on the Upper East Side of Manhattan and Doha, Qatar, as well as the new Cornell Tech campus to be built on Roosevelt Island in the heart of New York City.