On November 9, USAID Administrator Mark Green and the future CEO of Corteva Agriscience, Jim Collins, signed a partnership to further Corteva's and USAID’s shared goal of reducing global hunger.   Calling Corteva one of the most innovative agribusinesses of its kind, Administrator Green said this partnership will “help ensure that developing countries will have better access to America's greatest agricultural innovations and technologies.” Corteva, the agriculture division of DowDuPont, brings to the table technical expertise that can be used to help build the capacity of smallholder farmers and advance women’s empowerment. USAID’s work with Corteva will continue focusing on Africa and eventually expand to other markets. Previously, USAID and Corteva worked together in Ethiopia to improve agronomic practices, explore post-harvest storage and increase market access. While the collaboration between USAID and Corteva is not new, by signing this memorandum of understanding (MOU), USAID’s agreement with Corteva was formalized by both parties. Thanks to this partnership, there is already increased productivity and evidence of stronger resiliency. Now, building on this progress, this partnership will mobilize the unique capabilities of each organization, achieving more than either would have independently. Collins shared that this collaboration can help markets in developing countries access Corteva’s “best in class” technology. This partnership, which Collins described as a co-creation, is intended to be a two-way approach where USAID and Corteva can uniquely contribute strengths. The private sector can bring market-based solutions to address some of the key development challenges USAID faces, including access to technology for smallholder farmers. In addition to increased productivity, Corteva’s technological advancements have the potential to triple yields, create products that are drought-resistant and heat-tolerant, and address emerging issues like the fall armyworm. Read USAID’s press release about the signing.