By Aviva Kutnick & K. Bailey Morton, USAID; Matthias Herr & Maja Rueegg, Helvetas; Christian Steiner & Gisela Keller, Helvetas USA A USAID Co-Learning Initiative in Market Systems Development As an approach, Market Systems Development (MSD) can be hugely impactful. It can also be immensely complex and, at times, downright messy. It is critical for donor agencies and implementing partners to learn from one another so that all stakeholders can maximize their efforts and create lasting impact. With this goal in mind, USAID’s Bureau for Food Security invited Helvetas, a Swiss-based international development NGO and a strong partner of the Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC), to facilitate an MSD workshop in March 2018. Attendees included staff from USAID, the United States Department of Agriculture’s Foreign Agricultural Service and several implementing partners. Three key takeaways from the workshop: Adopt-Adapt-Expand-Respond Framework: A Case Study The Adopt-Adapt-Expand-Respond Framework, a tool used routinely by both SDC and Helvetas, was developed by the Springfield Centre to better manage and measure systemic change processes. For a deep dive into the theory, we recommend page 27 of SDC’s Operational Guide for the Making Markets Work for the Poor Approach and a 2014 Springfield Centre Briefing Paper. During the workshop, a case study was presented to illustrate the practical applications of this framework: The SDC-funded Samriddhi project, implemented by Helvetas in Bangladesh between 2010 and 2015, fostered accessible, affordable and holistic rural advisory services for producers and small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) in several agricultural value chains. Read this blog for more information on Samriddhi. At the center of the Rural Advisory Services system promoted by Samriddhi are Local Service Providers (LSPs), extension service providers who work closely with producers. They work as key agents between micro- and small enterprises (MSEs), financial service providers, input suppliers, processors and traders. As a result, producers are able to access needed information, inputs and services. LSPs are organized via Service Providers’ Associations (SPA). In this project, Helvetas applied the Adopt-Adapt-Expand-Respond Framework to the LSP-SPA model in the medicinal plants sector, an income source with tremendous potential particularly for poor women. Moving Forward This workshop was a positive step in facilitating a collaborative learning environment among MSD practitioners, especially among Feed the Future USG agencies and implementing partners. There is still much to learn. In particular, participants were eager to understand more about how Helvetas, SDC and other partners monitor and evaluate MSD programs and apply what they have learned to new models. Market Systems Development: Addressing the Root Causes In our experience, too many projects fall short in their attempts to achieve meaningful impact and bring about sustainable and large-scale change. They, quite simply, address the symptoms of underperformance while neglecting their root causes. Systems are dynamic, complex constructs made up by a variety of interdependent rules, norms and functions. Many actors inform behavior and have the power to determine who benefits and who is left out. Changing these systems can lay the groundwork for more inclusive and effective projects. USAID is increasingly recognizing inclusive Market Systems Development as a critical approach for achieving sustainable impact at scale. USAID’s approach “focuses on building the capacity and resilience of local systems, leveraging the incentives and resources of the private sector, ensuring the beneficial inclusion of the very poor and stimulating change and innovation that continues to grow beyond the life of the project.” (USAID Framework for Inclusive Market Systems Development) Based on the UK Springfield Centre’s Markets for the Poor (M4P) approach, MSD emerged as a leading framework among development practitioners and donor agencies on both sides of the Atlantic. Its goal, we believe, is an attainable one: to “improve the systems that help poor and disadvantaged people to get the goods, services, jobs and incomes that they need to improve their lives without the need for further development assistance.” (Springfield Centre)