For many years, we’ve been trying to understand the implications of shrinking farm sizes for millions of rural African households. Driven by population growth and growing land scarcity, most African farm households are witnessing the gradual sub-division of their farms over time, causing the median African farm to become smaller and smaller. Shrinking farm sizes was regarded by many as a metaphor for the declining prospects for African agriculture. Imagine our surprise, then, when we started to see evidence of a major rise in the number of farms between 5 and 100 hectares, starting about 10 years ago. We thought we knew African agriculture well but were surprised by this development. In hindsight, we shouldn’t have been. The prolonged surge in global food prices starting in 2007 ushered in major investment in African farmland by foreign investors. Why shouldn’t African investors have done the same? While the foreign “land grab” was well covered by the international media, the farmland investments by African professionals, entrepreneurs and civil service employees occurred largely under the radar screen. Ironically, the amount of land acquired by middle-sized African farmers (5-100 hectares) since 2000 far exceeds the amount acquired by foreign investors. A forthcoming study carried out jointly under the Feed the Future Innovation Lab for Food Security Policy and the Agricultural Policy Research in Africa (APRA) Project shows that in countries like Ghana, Nigeria, Tanzania and Zambia, the value share of national agricultural output accounted for by medium-scale farms has risen rapidly between 2000 and 2016. In some countries, medium-sized farms now account for roughly 50 percent of the value of national marketed agricultural production. In the more land-constrained areas of Kenya and Rwanda, by contrast, small-scale farms still account for the majority of national marketed agricultural output, though even in these countries, their share is slipping. While much remains unknown and the story is still unfolding, we believe that medium-scale farms are an important driver of agricultural and rural transformation in much of Africa. Here are our views on some frequently asked questions: Is it all positive? The answer depends on one’s time frame. The development of land markets – which is the process through which medium-scale farms are rapidly growing – is part and parcel of more wholesale changes in rural African societies. These changes are uprooting the traditional social fabric and creating new power structures. Some regard this as just an inevitable process of economic development, while others regard it as an erosion of indigenous peoples’ livelihoods and a way of life. Certainly, no region has transformed itself economically without major hardship and dislocations in the process. Policy makers will need guidance on how to minimize these hardships – protecting those who are most vulnerable as the processes of economic transformation gradually raise living standards for the majority of the population. The overall impacts of land reallocation from small to medium-scale farms on Africa’s economic transformation remain to be clearly understood. With support from the Innovation Lab for Food Security Policy and the APRA Project, we are hopeful that our forthcoming study will provide new evidence on these questions. Author notes: Thomas Jayne is University Foundation Professor, Michigan State University. Milu Muyanga is Assistant Professor, Michigan State University. Both are carrying out research with collaborators in Nigeria, Zambia, Kenya, Tanzania and Ghana on the impacts of the rise of African investor farmers on the region’s unfolding rural transformations. Acknowledgements: The work summarized in this blog was originally funded by the GISAIA Project, funded by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and led by Michigan State University and by the Innovation Lab for Food Security Policy, funded by USAID’s Bureau for Food Security and led by Michigan State University, the International Food Policy Research Institute, and the University of Pretoria. This work has entered a new phase in Nigeria with support from the APRA Project, funded by DFID and led by the Institute of Development Studies/Sussex.