USAID is seeking input on how to prioritize research on livestock diseases in Feed the Future target countries. Please share your views by completing this survey by Friday, April 13. Please see additional information below. Background: Ensuring access and affordability of animal source foods through enhanced disease resistance is crucial to addressing food security and global health in developing countries. Animal diseases represent a significant constraint to the production of meat, milk, and eggs as well as a potential threat to human health. They also undermine resilience and nutritional gains of livestock-keeping households through reduced animal growth and increased animal mortality. Recent technological advancements in genomics research and vaccine development offer novel approaches to increase disease resistance in livestock. Additionally, it has been recognized that the sustainable impact of any technology development efforts is dependent on the capacity of public and private veterinary services to deliver animal health inputs. USAID is seeking input on how to prioritize livestock diseases given their effects on livestock production, the relative lack of existing resources for research for each disease, and the potential to develop new or improved vaccines, vaccination strategies, and genomic approaches for controlling livestock diseases in Feed the Future target countries. The Feed the Future Target Countries are Bangladesh, Ethiopia, Ghana, Guatemala, Honduras, Mali, Kenya, Nepal, Nigeria, Niger, Senegal, and Uganda. How to complete the survey: Please fill out this survey, which is open to anyone with experiences or opinions to share. The survey can be filled out anonymously. USAID will consider responses on a rolling basis through a deadline of Friday, April 13, 2018. Your name and organization will not be shared nor used in the written summary of survey results. For all open-ended questions that ask for justification or further explanation, we encourage you to include any resources (e.g. journal articles, points-of-contact, socioeconomic data sources) that you think would be relevant. If you have any questions, please email animalhealth@usaid.gov (link sends e-mail). Thank you for your valued input!