Well-designed indicators provide information which can be used in a multitude of ways. These multi-purpose indicators can be rare finds; they may not exist in every project. I recently stumbled upon one while running a workshop with a team of organizations to unify their monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system. One indicator that the government representatives felt passionate about was, “Percentage of Local Government Authorities with Climate Smart Agriculture Mainstreamed,” where mainstreaming is defined as local budgets containing line items for Climate Smart Agricultural (CSA) practices. There was initial resistance to the idea of including this as an indicator. Program partners focus on collaboratively developing research-informed materials for government use in training agricultural professionals to conduct resilient agriculture-focused extension exercises with farmers. Program partners felt very strongly that they could not, and the project should not, be accountable for delivering data on this indicator, as the Local Government Authorities (LGAs) are autonomous and project partners have little direct power over them. Government partners advocated for this indicator, as it helped to connect the project to their government’s broader agricultural development plans, and without including it, the government partners working on this project would have a difficult time justifying the project. They also advocated that the indicator could be used to help partner groups communicate with one another about the LGAs being worked with, LGAs with budget lines for CSA, and LGAS without CSA budget lines. The government partners’ argument was that in their capacity from the central government they could work with LGAs not including CSA in budgets to problem solve and apply extra pressure. All partners concurred that program sustainability depends on having a high percentage of LGAs with budgets that contain lines for CSA work. This condition also lays ground work for follow-on projects to leverage pre-existing ability and resources. All partners also agreed that using the indicator to increase coordination and to clarify partner roles in working with the LGAs was valuable. And all partners were also concerned that including this indicator in a formal reporting plan would open the project up to negative external evaluations, as there are numerous external and contextual factors beyond project partners’ control which could negatively impact LGA inclusion of CSA in their budgets. This was a break-through for project partners who had previously struggled to come to a unified agreement on how to measure high-level organizational changes that contribute to sustainability. All partners decided to include this indicator, as it could be used to coordinate project implementation, provide valuable information for the government, indicate success at achieving impact-level change and provide important information for follow on projects. So what’s the catch? Project partners and their donors need to be very clear about establishing the impact-level nature of the indicator and include language that protects partners,  in the event of an external evaluation, from being held accountable for change beyond their locus of control. By not including this indicator, the project and project partners would be missing a critical piece of information that helps improve partner coordination and negotiation of complex operational agreements. Kim Castelin is an M&E Specialist with Washington State University who instructs an online M&E course for use in adaptive program management. Her previous experience includes leading M&E efforts for a USAID-funded program in Afghanistan. Check out the course page for more information and current offerings: https://www.eiseverywhere.com/ehome/263643 or follow the course on Twitter: https://twitter.com/M_E_Lead_Learn.