Diseases, insects, weeds and wildlife are constantly attacking agricultural crops across the developing world where the vast majority of people are dependent on farming for their livelihoods. Pests have the easiest time decimating pure monocultures of crops where they can spread from plant to plant. Global pest problems seem to be getting worse each year. The intensification of agriculture has intensified our pest problems in recent decades. In addition, regional warming trends, changes in weather patterns and extensive deforestation are all helping pests spread faster. As the Green Revolution mentality (growing improved seed varieties with chemical fertilizers and insecticides) spread around the world over the last 75 years, so spread the pests which thrive on large monocultures of food crops. The extent of such uncontrolled spreading can be seen with Tuta absoluta, a leaf miner native to South America, which hopped from farm to farm until it now threatens farmers across the globe. Armyworms continue to spread and infest monocultures of maize, peppers and other crops in just about every agricultural zone on the planet. Using Green Revolution farming techniques, millions of farmers worldwide have cleared, intensified and degraded their fields, leaving themselves even more vulnerable to pestilence. If you think that our technical savviness and love of innovation will continually save global food systems for the hundreds or thousands of years we expect to survive on this planet, you are wrong. The only way to "Feed the Future" and fend off the increasing and changing patterns of agricultural pests and diseases is by building the natural pest resilience of farms around the world. As we work with thousands of farmers around the globe, we find they universally appreciate the intention of Integrated Pest Management, but they do not know how to put it into practice. There are plenty of IPM resources across the Internet, but most are limited by their narrow focus on natural pesticides and treatments for insect infestation. It is important to understand that finding natural treatments for insects is only the tip of the iceberg when it comes to IPM. There are so many more components involved!  Jatropha curcas helps form a Green Wall around a field. The first step in the Forest Garden Approach is to protect the field. First, we train farmers to plant a Green Wall around the farm to keep out animals such as goats, sheep and cattle. Our Green Walls have proven to keep hippopotami in Senegal out of crop fields. You can even keep elephants out if you add bee hives or chili pepper plants all around the Green Wall! Once farmers have a wall of trees around their field, we teach them how to plant rows of agroforestry trees across their farms to protect from erosion and improve soils. On a one-hectare farm, there may be 3-6 rows of trees crossing the field, depending on the size and slope of the field. The slope of the field usually tells you which orientation your rows of trees should be planted; rows of trees should follow the contour of the slope of the land. A series of contour rows will divide the field into bands or segments down the hillside. If the field is on flat land, then rows of nitrogen-fixing trees should be planted across the field in alleys from east to west in line with the sun so the farmer can grow crops among the rows.  TREES Executive Director John Leary giving a field segmentation and crop rotation workshop for farmers in Mali in 2006.  TREES Technicians practicing grafting a mango variety onto a hardy rootstock. With companion planting, farmers grow more plants in the same space by leveraging complementary relationships among plants. Plants can be companions because they occupy space together well, they protect each other or they grow better because of some beneficial interaction. Here is a great chart to help you find companions for vegetables you grow.  Companion planting is the gateway to permagardening. Start by growing two or three things together, and eventually you can build what is known as a guild in permagardening. A guild will have several species sustainably growing together in layers. Here are the seven components of a guild that we encourage farmers to plant together:
1. Food for us (that’s easy)
2. Food for the soil (something leguminous that fixes nitrogen or drops leaf litter)
3. Food for animals (can be anything: goats, cows, bees or butterflies)
4. Diggers (grow below the soil like potatoes or sweet potatoes)
5. Standers (there are many options such as tomatoes or okra)
6. Climbers (cucumbers or peas)
7. Protectors (such as scented herbs, basil, onions, hot pepper or marigolds) If a farmer has implemented all of the components discussed above and still has an insect problem, the last line of defense entails natural remedies. Natural things such as ash, hot pepper, soap and even tobacco can either kill or chase away pests. Dusting infected areas with wood ash deters soft-bodied insects like termites. Neem trees are common across the developing tropics (Azadirachta indica is more potent than the other species) and have numerous active ingredients in their leaves and seeds, including azadirachtin, which disrupts the life cycle of many pests but is harmless to humans. In 2019, Trees for the Future celebrates 30 years of working to improve the lives of communities across the developing world. In that time, we have seen how landscapes across Latin America, Africa and Asia are degrading and changing faster than farmers can keep up. If we can help farmers across the developing world to put these seven lines of defense in place against pests, then we can build permanent pest resilience into farms across the world in a way that is not only environmentally sustainable, but also environmentally regenerative. You too can become a Certified Forest Garden Trainer capable of training farmers around the world to build the Seven Lines of Defense against pests! Join us! Register at the Forest Garden Training Center by going to training.trees.org.