Cornell is hiring instructors to be a part of our Master of Public Health Program. We are looking for PhD and MPH grads in relevant fields with with 5+ years of applied, field-based experience. Instructors will link directly to each of our two concentration areas -- 1) food systems and health or 2) infectious disease epidemiology. Please learn more about the position here: https://academicjobsonline.org/ajo/Cornell/MPH The Instructor(s) will work with students in one of two of the concentration areas to help ensure student learning and application of knowledge and skills in case-based scenarios and real-world experiences. This will include teaching parts of the suite of already existing applied public health courses, and mentoring students in their multi-semester applied and community-engaged project work centered on the core functions of public health: Assessment, Program/Policy Planning, Program Monitoring/Evaluation/Performance Improvement. The Instructor(s) will also mentor students through their Capstone Project. Advertisement: Public Health Instructor (part- or full-time) Cornell University is looking for one-to-two Instructor(s) (part-time or full time) for the Master in Public Health (MPH) program. MPH program details are listed here: www.publichealth.cornell.edu. The instructor(s) will work with students in one of two of the concertation areas to help ensure student learning and application of knowledge and skills in case-based scenarios and real-world experiences. This will include teaching parts of the suite of already existing applied public health courses, and mentoring students in their multi-semester applied and community-engaged project work centered on the core functions of public health: Assessment, Program/Policy Planning, Program Monitoring/Evaluation/Performance Improvement. The instructor(s) will also mentor students through their Capstone Project. The ideal candidate(s) will have: • A MPH (or similar degree) • At least five years of practical and relevant applied public health experience, such as working in a health department, working with a health agency, or working in a community-based organization planning and implementing public health programs. Candidates with additional professional (DrPH, DVM, MD, RN, RD, etc.) or research (PhD) degrees may be preferred, and may be exempt from two years of experience. • Experience teaching, mentoring, or building capacity, particularly related to public health (students, workforce, community collaborators) • Experience in the essential services of public health: assessing needs, measuring gaps, designing interventions, implementing programs, evaluating program, developing coalitions, leading teams, etc. • Interest in, and experience related to one of our two concentration areas: o Infectious Disease Epidemiology, in which students learn how viral, bacterial and parasitic diseases transmit and cause disease in populations; explore control and diagnostic measures for infectious disease prevention and management; gain hands-on opportunities in infectious disease tracking and epidemiology; and engage in systems thinking to address established and emerging infectious diseases using One Health perspective. Students become prepared to address both established and emerging infectious diseases that have global, national and local impact on Public Health. o Food Systems and Health, in which students learn to take a systems approach to assess and coordinate policies or interventions that ensure safe and sustainable land use, food production, food storage, food processing, food delivery, and consumption. This includes training in toxicology, food safety, food and water security, and/or nutrition. Students learn how to engage local and global communities to assess systems or needs, develop interventions from a One Health approach, and lead monitoring and evaluation processes to ensure public health needs are being met. The candidate(s), in partnership with the MPH Program leadership, will have responsibility for teaching and mentoring a cohort of MPH students in formal classroom settings, via case-based learning, and field-based integrated learning. Some effort will be allocated for extramural public health service and engagement (allowing the candidates to be involved in public health practice work), and some effort may be allocated for scholarly activities, including primary or collaborative public health research, publication of case series or case reports and book chapters, as well as service to the college and professional associations. These are non-tenure track faculty appointments, and may be offered at full time, or part-time with the possibility of growth. Joint appointments will be considered. Salary and title will be commensurate with credentials and experience. For more information about this position or the search, contact Gen Meredith, Search Committee Chair, gmeredith@cornell.edu. Prospective candidates should upload their application materials (a one-to-two page personal statement summarizing their experience, concentration area of interest, and potential contribution to the MPH program; contributions to inclusion and diversity; curriculum vitae; and contact information for three professional references) to Academic Jobs Online (AJO) job #12770. What is a Statement of Contribution to Diversity? A statement invites applicants to describe their past, present, and/or future aspirations to promoting equity, inclusion, and diversity in their careers as researchers and educators, and/or to convey how they see these commitments continuing at Cornell. Such articulation can focus on teaching, research, or service, or all of three factors. Diversity and Inclusion are a part of Cornell University’s heritage. We are a recognized employer and educator valuing AA/EEO, Protected Veterans and Individuals with Disabilities. The University seeks to meet the needs of dual career couples and has a Dual Career program to assist with dual career searches. The Cornell University College of Veterinary Medicine is recognized internationally as a leader in public health, biomedical research, animal medicine, and veterinary medical education. It has been consistently ranked as a top veterinary college in the nation by US News & World Report since 2000. Cornell University is an innovative Ivy League university and an exceptional place to work. Our inclusive community of scholars, students and staff impart an uncommon sense of larger purpose and contribute creative ideas to further the university's mission of teaching, discovery and engagement. Located in Ithaca, NY, Cornell's far-flung global presence includes the medical college's campuses on the Upper East Side of Manhattan and Doha, Qatar, as well as the new Cornell Tech campus to be built on Roosevelt Island in the heart of New York City. Application Materials Required: Further Info: