A key goal of Feed the Future is to increase youth empowerment and livelihoods, because supporting and empowering youth can help to sustainably reduce global hunger, malnutrition and poverty. With one third of the total population — about 2.3 billion people — currently between the ages of 15-34 years old, there is no better time to focus on youth. About 80 percent of these young people live in developing countries. The largest youth populations are in Sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia, where youth un/under-employment is high[1]. Currently, the formal job sector cannot provide enough jobs for the millions of young people entering the job market each year[2]. Since the formal job sector will not be able to meet demand, most youth in developing countries will need to rely on self-employment, micro-entrepreneurship or mixed-livelihoods (i.e. earning income from multiple activities) to earn their livelihoods. Further, population growth is increasing global demand for food, adding stressors to existing agri-food systems. To feed nine billion people by 2050, there is a need to sustainably increase productivity and efficiency of agri-food systems. The global food system is the largest employer of youth. It will remain an important source of livelihoods opportunities for youth, especially through off-farm activities and through value chains (e.g. processing, marketing, etc.), as these opportunities are often more profitable and more interesting to young people compared to small-scale, production agriculture. Simply put, youth need agriculture, and agriculture needs youth. Though youth empowerment and livelihoods has been further elevated in Feed the Future’s approach to ending hunger and poverty, intentional youth engagement in programming is relatively new in the initiative[3]. In the first iteration of Feed the Future, youth participation in programming was not tracked, and few programs focused specifically on engaging youth. To address these challenges, we recently released the Feed the Future Project Design Guide for Youth-Inclusive Agriculture and Food Systems[4], a tool to help Feed the Future partners better integrate and increase engagement of youth aged 15-29 in the work that we do. There are two volumes of the Guide; the first aims to support youth engagement in program design throughout the program cycle, and the second offers implementation guidance for activity-level interventions. Key Takeaways from Volume One of the Guide: Key Takeaways from Volume Two of the Guide: This is just a short overview of Feed the Future’s youth programming. For more details, please refer to volumes one and two of the Guide. For additional information, please consult the resources in the sidebar. [1] The Chicago Council for Global Affairs Youth for Growth Report (2018) [2] Ibid [3] Feed the Future website [4] Feed the Future Project Design Guide for Youth-Inclusive Agriculture and Food Systems (Volumes I & II)