This post was co-authored by EcoVentures International. In recent years, donors and practitioners working in value chain and market development for the benefit of the poor have made significant progress in developing a better contextual and conceptual understanding of the complex and dynamic nature of market systems and their enabling environment contexts. Within the U.S. Global Food Security Strategy (GFSS), market system strengthening serves to support a growing, resilient, competitive, inclusive, nutritious and sustainable agriculture and food market system to, in turn, increase producers’ income through productivity and profitability improvements. In this light, USAID's Office of Market and Partnership Innovations recently funded a rapid review of the existing tools and learning around measuring the outcomes and impacts of market systems development. Conducted under the Feed the Future Enabling Environment for Food Security project with EcoVentures International, the review is being used to inform the GFSS learning agenda moving forward. It appears that while there is progress in understanding systemic change in market development, there remains a lack of agreement and experience with how to measure it. There are, however, a variety of applicable measurement approaches and tools researchers and implementers are testing to inform the measurement of market systems change. Before diving into the indicators, let’s quickly recap a few helpful definitions. Defining Market System Strengthening and Enabling Environment As with the more general concept of systems change, market system strengthening can be defined relative to three distinct change domains including outcomes/impacts, inclusion/actors and conduct/governance. These three change domains are also related to the structure-conduct-performance (SCP) framework for analyzing firm and industry behavior. The enabling environment — often described as the laws, social and cultural norms, institutions, and procedures that guide behavior — is cross-cutting in relation to these domains in agricultural markets and the food systems. A facilitating enabling environment is inclusive of the informal and formal rules, codes of conduct, and the structures and institutions that support them. It also includes the important social and cultural norms and incentives that ultimately influence behavior, relationships and decision-making across transactions in a system. Exploring Indicators for Measuring Market System Strengthening The rapid review highlighted several approaches for identifying indicators of systems change. Key discussions included: Deepening Discussions on Findings at the Global Market Systems Symposium A group of more than 130 leading practitioners and donors engaged in the market systems development space convened at the global Market Systems Symposium in South Africa in April 2018. Their discussions highlighted a number of emerging principles to better support the strengthening of market systems and their enabling environment contexts, which were further affirmed in the rapid review. These included: To learn more about tools and learning from the review, see the M&E for Market Systems Literature Review. Check out the principles described in the related blog Five Market Systems Enabling Environment Recommendations and access Market Systems Symposium 2019 to pre-register your interest in attending next year.