Why it matters The consistent application of quality standards is a core component of any structured grain trading system. Variable standards and the inconsistent application of standards increase transaction costs for cross-border trade and extend the time needed for clearing borders. What the USAID Hub did To address the trade inefficiencies above, the USAID East Africa Trade and Investment Hub (the Hub) partnered with the Eastern Africa Grain Council (EAGC) to support the East African Community (EAC) Secretariat in reviewing and harmonizing nine of the 22 East African standards for staple foods, i.e. cereals/grains, pulses and their products. The Hub and EAGC partnership also helped the EAC Secretariat to develop sampling and test methods for the consistent applications of those standards. Expected impact The new harmonized standards will increase intra-regional trade of staples and reduce the cost of cross-border transactions. Why nine standards? Nine standards were prioritized for review following a gap analysis study conducted by EAGC, Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency, and FoodTrade East and Southern Africa. The study found that nine standards had the most extensive technical gaps, caused by missing parameters in the specification tables, missing terms in the definitions, misinterpretations (due to lack of clarity on definitions) and stringent limitations on requirements. Grain stakeholders in the EAC supported these findings and affirmed the prioritization of the nine standards for revision. In October 2016, the Hub committed to support EAGC and the EAC secretariat to revise the standards. FoodTrade East and Southern Africa also provided some support in early 2016. The EAC Council of Ministers approved the nine revised standards and two sampling and test methods following a November 27 – December 1 meeting in Kampala, Uganda. Gazetted On December 7, 2017, the following nine standards were gazetted under EAC Legal Notice Number EAC/149/2017: The following two sampling and test methods were also approved: Implementation The EAGC planned a series of introduction meetings to roll out the revised standards across the five EAC countries. Beginning in January 2018, the EAGC has: The hub has continuously supported the EAGC to hold these events and will work with the newly formed East African Cross Border Traders Association to ensure dissemination of information of the revised standards to traders at the border posts. Focus will be placed on the border posts with the largest movements of these grains in the EAC which are; Busia (408,450 MT), Gatuna (39,144 MT) and Malaba (1,354 MT) respectively.