July 26th | 9:00 - 10:00 am CDT Register now! Join SIL on July 26th for an informational webinar showcasing its low-cost, locally-produced and locally-serviced multi-crop thresher. Mechanized threshing is a valuable tool in the reduction of post-harvest loss in grains and cereals because it can allow quicker removal of a crop from the field, reducing losses from shattering or disease and reducing exposure to birds, rodents and adverse weather.
On many smallholder farms, mechanical threshers can replace manual threshing by hand beating, a practice that often results in grain spillage, grain breakage, and incomplete separation of the grain from the chaff. Manual threshing is also a very labor and time intensive process that results in high human energy expenditure and a high rate of drudgery in the agricultural system. The introduction of low-cost, locally-produced mechanized threshing systems in smallholder agriculture can significantly reduce post-harvest loss in staple food grains.
SIL collaborated with Ghanaian thresher manufacturers to develop a larger-scale multi-crop thresher with zero machine loss that can shell maize and thresh soybean, rice, beans, sorghum and other crops. The thresher is 40 times faster than manual beating when harvesting soybean, produces almost no dust, has near zero machine loss, does not split seeds, winnows out chaff, and requires only two people to feed and operate it efficiently. Commercially available multi-crop threshers that were also tested had from 5-50% machine loss of grain, required more people to operate, and produced large amounts of dust. The SIL thresher, which has different threshing concaves for different crops, sells in Ghana for approximately $2,000 U.S. and is designed for middle-sized farmers or for-hire service providers who can also provide threshing services to groups of smallholder farmers.
Join us on July 26th to learn more about this important innovation, get connected with the SIL researchers scaling up the design across Africa, watch video footage of the thresher in action and get your questions answered from the designers and experts themselves.