Introducing the Water Productivity Project (WAPRO)’s Push-Pull-Policy Approach Evidence shows that water and irrigation scarcity is a key concern for global food security. Water-related conflicts are on the rise. Water productivity — the ratio of agricultural output per unit of water input — is as a key leverage point for increasing food security. More than two-thirds of human water consumption is used for agriculture, and an estimated 50 percent of agricultural investment in China, Indonesia and Pakistan has gone toward irrigation. As climate change advances, water is becoming an increasingly scarce resource, further threatening the already fragile state of agriculture in many countries and creating a growing risk of conflict over rights to water resources. Addressing water issues is thus a key component for achieving sustainable development in these countries, reducing hunger while promoting peace and economic wellbeing. Helvetas, the largest Swiss-based international development NGO, is the consortium leader of a multi-sectoral group of actors that is rolling out an innovative approach through the Water and Productivity Project (WAPRO). The goal is to address inefficient irrigation practices in smallholder farming. “The application of new production and irrigation practices will allow farmers to maintain or grow their incomes without putting additional strain on local water supplies,” says Jens Soth, Senior Advisor Value Chains & Sustainable Commodities, Helvetas. The project is supported by the Global Programme Food Security of the Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC). PUSH – PULL – POLICY WAPRO recognizes that increasing water productivity in the field cannot be tackled by individual actors on their own, but rather must be addressed in a holistic manner. WAPRO’s approach brings together a set of three components that work synergistically to make increased water productivity a reality: SIX SUB-PROJECTS IN FOUR COUNTRIES WAPRO is now wrapping up its first three-year implementation phase (2015-2018) with six sub-projects operating in India, Pakistan, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan. These projects focus on rice and cotton production, two highly water-intensive crops that play important roles in local food security and economic growth. WAPRO works with the Sustainable Rice Platform, a multi-stakeholder partnership to promote resource efficiency and sustainability, and the Better Cotton Initiative, a non-profit stewarding global standards for a more sustainable way of growing cotton, to implement and scale up WAPRO’s approaches in India and Pakistan. Additional project partners include Mars Food, owner of the rice brand Uncle Ben’s Rice; Reismuehle Brunnen; Coop, a Swiss supermarket chain; the NGO Alliance for Water Stewardship; and Helvetas local country programs. Overall, the project expects to enhance farming income and increase water productivity for 45,000 farmer families by the end of 2018. A second phase for the project is planned for 2018-2021 with financing from SDC, Helvetas and other partner organizations participating in the project. WAPRO strongly reflects Helvetas’ holistic approach. Helvetas believes that equitable access to water and its efficient use are key for sustainable development and contribute to poverty reduction and the Sustainable Development Goals.