Do you know which birds will start to sing before a significant rain arrives or which trees grow new leaves before the dry season begins? Could you say how the direction of the wind changes during the summer versus the winter? Traditionally, farmers across the Sahel have relied on environmental signs such as these to guide their agricultural decisions, such as when to prepare their fields and what to plant. However, the impacts of climate variability and change have decreased the reliability of these traditional indicators, while also introducing new risks. Recent analysis of climate modeling from the United Nations advisory body, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, shows that temperatures and rainfall patterns will soon evolve beyond anything the region has experienced before, making rural communities increasingly susceptible to drought and famine. Smallholder rain-fed farmers are acutely aware of these changes. As Maman Ousmane, a 55-year-old Nigerien farmer, explained, “There has been a lot of change in the weather and seasons in recent years. These changes are mainly regarding rainfall — either too little or too much. For example, this past year there was a lot of rain recorded that caused a lot of damage [to crops] due to flooding.” Given these changes and the unreliability of traditional indicators, weather and climate information services, such as rainfall data and seasonal forecasts, can play a crucial role in supporting communities to take actions that increase resilience, enhance production and improve food security. Improvements in technology have provided us new opportunities to respond to these needs, enabling us to understand our climate at larger and more significant scales. We can track cloud formations across continents, and we know where droughts are most likely to take place. While in some parts of the world this information is readily available through smartphone applications, for farmers across the Sahel, this information is often disrupted, poorly communicated or lacks the context necessary to enable farmers to adapt their techniques in ways that could increase and protect their harvests. As part of the USAID-funded Climate Information Services Research Initiative (CISRI), a Mercy Corps-led consortium is developing and piloting a participatory systems mapping methodology to investigate how climate information reaches smallholder farmers. Through a series of participatory workshops starting from the village up to the national level, the CISRI team engages stakeholders at all points in the climate information communication chain. Climate information providers, users and interpreters hear one another’s perspectives on the system and together identify the factors that influence the delivery, access and use of climate information. Conversations around the systems’ inefficiencies and breakdowns then serve as the foundation for the co-development of action plans that articulate opportunities for participants to implement local solutions. In February and March, the CISRI field research team began piloting the approach with four village-level mappings in Zinder Region, in southern Niger. While earlier pilots in Senegal and Niger targeted communities in which projects currently provide climate information, this pilot examined communities that did not have prior training or activities in this field. The workshops kicked off with the development of a seasonal calendar that helped to introduce climate terminology to the community and opened up conversations around the type of climate information farmers wanted to receive. The research team also gained valuable insights into the sources of indigenous knowledge that have traditionally assisted farmers in adapting to stressful climates. Following the seasonal mappings, the workshops turned to the mapping of climate information, including the actors that deliver climate information; the social, cultural, economic and political factors that influence the external environment; and the services needed to improve delivery, uptake and use. As a group, farmers put together visual flow charts demonstrating how information directly or indirectly reaches them and discussed current gaps within the system, the trustworthiness of these sources and the usefulness of the information they are receiving. Preliminary findings show that a majority of information reaches farmers in Zinder Region, Niger from three sources: 1) radio broadcasts, 2) mayoral offices, and 3) friends and neighbors via word of mouth. Interviews with key actors at the district and national level revealed that while public and private climate research organizations operate in Niger, most climate information actually travels from communities to research labs. For instance, research stations have trained farmers in some villages to collect rainfall data with rain gauges stationed in each department. This data is processed at district and national levels, but the analysis is rarely shared back to the farmers. Farmers also stressed that if they do hear climate information, such as expected rainfall, the information typically comes after key decision points or it lacks context to inform their decisions, such as planting time, seed selection and fertilizer quantity. In the next stage of the research, currently underway, the CISRI team is hosting a workshop to bring together farmer representatives from these villages with influential leaders and decision-makers who play an integral role in the climate information system. These include village chiefs, mayors and regional government representatives, as well as members of national meteorological services, farmers’ organizations and the media. In these workshops, participants will bring their own knowledge and perspectives of the climate information system to expand upon the village-level maps. These collaborative exercises and discussions will support participants to realize a broader and deeper understanding of the system and their own roles and responsibilities within it. They will be guided to answer hard questions about the actions that can be taken at a local level to improve the system, the kind of support that is needed from others to take those steps and who needs to be involved. The CISRI team will synthesize the findings from this workshop with those from its other two pilots to provide recommendations for improving the practical design and delivery of climate information services for smallholder farmers. It will also refine a facilitators’ guide and tools so that other practitioners can employ this methodology in their own work. This farmer-focused approach has been valued by the communities and national stakeholders alike as they gain insights into a system many recognized as broken but could not change alone. Maman Ousmane says it best, "These discussions were useful because there was a consideration of our answers. It was our experiences and our observations that were asked each time. We are very grateful that we have been brought together to share our perspectives and knowledge and to speak with one voice." This post was written by Kelly Kurz and Kristin Lambert from Mercy Corps.