Announcement number: USAID - 18 - ES002Opening date: May 15, 2018Closing date: June 4, 2018 Please view the vacancy announcement on USAJobs for complete information. The Bureau for Food Security (BFS) coordinates implementation of the U.S. Global Food Security Strategy (GFSS) through the Feed the Future (FTF) initiative and houses the Center for Resilience. BFS manages an annual budget of roughly $1 billion and draws on the strengths of 11 agencies across the U.S. Government (USG), while leveraging resources and efforts of other donors, multilateral organizations, the private sector, civil society, universities, research institutions and other stakeholders to accelerate inclusive agricultural growth to increase incomes, reduce hunger, poverty and undernutrition. BFS reviews and approves all FTF-related strategies for investments in FTF target countries, as well as complementary investments in regional programs, strategic partners and multilateral mechanisms. BFS also identifies resilience focus countries and provides technical assistance and program tracking for the Agency in those countries.
The Bureau, comprised of five offices and the Center for Resilience, brings together programmatic, technical, and regional expertise from throughout the Agency to help partner countries accelerate inclusive, agriculture-led growth, strengthen resilience and improve nutrition. BFS provides food security, nutrition, and resilience-related strategic, design, and implementation support to country, regional, and Washington-based operating units. The Deputy Assistant to the Administrator in the Bureau for Food Security is responsible for having substantial day-to-day management responsibilities for the Bureau and spurring the Agency's efforts to promote resilience in places prone to recurrent humanitarian crises and substantially reducing global hunger and poverty. The incumbent is recognized as an Agency authority in formulating new policies and program objectives that have a broad or long-range impact on the resilience and food security programs of the Agency. The Deputy Assistant to the Administrator reports directly to the Assistant to the Administrator. Duties include: