Nuru strives to make data driven decisions in all of its programming, and what follows is just one example of how smart use of real time data can help farmer households address pests, disease and other challenges that can affect the health of a harvest. Smart farming is not a static concept that can be pulled off a shelf and applied in any context. Agriculture by its very nature requires constant tweaks and touch-ups, and most importantly, it needs to be informed by data. In 2016, in response to the Fall Armyworm (FAW) outbreak across Africa, Nuru developed a system of mobile data collection, data visualization and targeted training and extension that provides timely, accessible and actionable FAW information directly to farmers. The system develops the capacity of Nuru staff and partners to effectively use smartphones, interpret mobile survey software and comprehend geospatial data analysis. Tewodros Dawit (pictured above), Nuru Ethiopia Data Entry Officer, tested the system in 2017 as part of a Nuru International/Nuru Ethiopia joint initiative. Teddy is now leading the training and supporting the rollout of a local language smart farming monitoring system with a suite of feedback loops from training, to data collection, to community feedback. This allows Nuru to provide farmers and local government partners with timely, actionable and relevant insights for combating FAW and managing their productive assets field-to-field and across their shared landscape. Data that reaches farmers needs to be timely, seasonal in its flow, and precise without preconception. To be effective, monitoring and evaluation systems must inform the intended participants and actions on the ground. This is an effort Nuru is dedicated to, but it is tough work to consistently implement and scale. Nuru aspires to confront the challenge of arming farmers with timely information through partnerships with innovative actors. We always have a keen eye to transparency and accountability with and for local communities. Please visit here for more information on Nuru farmer experiences with the FAW outbreak in 2018. This post is fourth in a six part series on Nuru’s rural livelihoods programming. To read the first post, second post, and third post follow the respective links.